# The Monastery

Brother Thomas carried the heavy wooden buckets down the cramped stone
stairs. Spiraling down into darkness, the stairs were far too narrow to
take on with a bucket in each hand, so he went down sideways, pausing on
each step to steady his balance before moving down to the next step.
Keeping the soapy water in the buckets was a matter of safety -- slipping
on one of these steps could kill a man.

Brother William was ahead of him on the stairs carrying the brushes, the
mop, and the lantern. Being the junior-most member of the Order by at least
fifteen years, William should, by all rights, be carrying the buckets.
However, William was also, by far, the least careful monk to call the
monastery home.  This was William's fourth position here, and he had
somehow managed last week -- despite the safety glass on the lantern -- to
light the mop on fire.

Today, oblivious to the purpose he served as lamp holder, William had
rushed ahead down the stairs and left Thomas in the dark. Not his first
time at this task, Thomas had kept careful count of the number of steps he
had already descended, given his habit of counting while at work to keep
his mind attentive,  he knew he was not much farther from the bottom.

Also, it was impossible to get lost in a stairwell.

"I must remember to talk to the Cellarer about adding more vegetables to
our daily meals," Thomas thought to himself and his belly rubbed along the
wall of the narrow stairwell.  His stocky frame had served him well in the
brew house, but here it only served as the reminder of his transgression.
Well, a transgression according to the Abbot, at least.  Was it really so
sinful to regularly sample the beer and make sure it hadn't spoiled?
Another night of meditation on that question awaited him at Compline.

Thomas eventually passed through the arch at the bottom of the stairs and
came into the antechamber. He set the buckets down and paused to let his
eyes adjust.

The first thing he could see was the face of Brother William shining in the
lamplight, bearing the smile of one satisfied at having done a good job.
William's brown robe next became visible, and he looked to Thomas as though
he were swimming in a tapestry.  Tailored robes were available to all
Brothers in the Order, but for some reason William decided to keep the
temporary robes given to all novices, even though the robes were far too
large for his thin frame.

"Thank you for carefully lighting the way, Brother William."

"You're most welcome, Brother Thomas!"

Thomas examined William's face for a moment to see if his subtle admonition
had its desired effect. Other than his blinking eyes, William's face
betrayed no hint of understanding, confirming for Thomas that sarcasm was
beyond his ken.

"Very good," said Thomas, "The lamp is burning and we've work to
do." He bent at the knees to pick up the buckets. "Would you be so kind
as to open the door?"

"Of course," said William, who them hung the lantern on a hook by the door
and carefully set down the brushes and mop as if they were made of glass.

Brother Thomas, having resumed his heavy burden, was unsurprised to see
that the brushes and mop had been laid in his path.

"Along the wall, Brother," he said, looking from the cleaning equipment to
the wall.

"Oh!  Yes, right," said William as he pushed them towards the wall with his
foot before turning his attention to the brass pressure door.

The door was rectangular with rounded corners, about twice as high as it 
was wide.  On the right side of the door were two reinforced double hinges,
and on the left were two large wing-handled nuts threaded onto large rods
integrated into the door frame.

Even in this light one could see the light green oxidization hinting
strongly that the door would be difficult to open.

William drew a wooden mallet from somewhere in his over-sized robe and
struck the door handles three or four times each to crack them loose. He
stuffed the mallet back into his robe, unscrewed the two wing-nuts clean
off their posts, and then set them on the ground next to the brushes and
mop.

Thomas, having set the buckets down near the pressure door, withdrew a pry
bar from his robes and handed it to William.

"If you'll do the honors."

William took off his robe and set it on a hook in the wall, leaving him
wearing something that resembled a loincloth. He then took the pry bar and
set to work at the door.  

The tarred rope seal would be like hardened glue by now, and it was going
to take quite some effort to get it open.

Clearing the seal at the top and bottom of the door was usually done first
because it would reduce the seal's surface and make the door easier to
open, but William didn't hold by such ideas.  Instead, he set the pry bar
at the side of the door opposite the hinge and leaned back against the bar
to give it a mighty pull, the kind of pull that can only be performed by the
young and inexperienced.  After straining and grunting for what felt like
minutes, the seal finally broke and the door cracked open.

William, happy and out of breath, extended the pry bar back to Thomas, his
hands shaking from being strained.

"Excellent work," said Thomas as he snatched back the pry bar and
squirreled it away.  "Now finish with the door and we'll make quick work of
cleaning the dry well."

The door hinges were stiff, so William once again put his back into it and
slowly pulled the door open.  As he did so, a pale hand fell through the door
opening and clanged against the door flange, drawing Thomas' attention. The
light from the lamp hanging by the door cast a slim beam into the well, and
Thomas could just make out a human form in the dim light.

"Fetch the Abbot, Brother William," said Thomas flatly. "And be quick."
